# ARIMA_X-SARIMA_X-Time-Series-Forecasting

The scope of this project is to demonstrate the use of ARIMA-(X) and SARIMA(-X) models to fit data obtained from an 'Electricity Production' dataset('.csv' file format) and to forecast the future values of this time series. The first part of this demonstration (PART I) is focused on data preparation/manipulation of the imported dataset features to apply all necessary data preprocessing/cleaning methods by converting the dataset into a dataframe (pandas). In addition, basic exploratory data analysis is provided to highlight key aspects of the time series ('Monthly Electricity Production Output') with respect to its past behavior, so as to get meaningful insights with respect to its distribution and its behavior when grouped at different time periods. Moreover, the stationarity of the time series is tested (stationary or non stationary), as it represents the change of its statistical properties over time (use of rolling mean and standard deviation, Augmented Dickey–Fuller(ADF) test, decomposition,shifting and differencing).

In the second part of this project (Part II), the fitting and forecasting capabilities of the Autoregressive Moving Average model (ARIMA) are investigated. The order for each part of the model is determined either by autocorrelation (MA) and partial autocorrelation (AR) or based on the Akaike Information Criterion for a range of orders(0 to 5). Dataset is split into fitting & test samples, the ARIMA model fits the samples and then performs two types of 24 month forecasts. In terms of the first type of forecast, there is presence of test data to compare the target values with the forecasted 'Mean Monthly Electricity Production Output' values, whereas in the second forecast, the model forecasts the future values of the time series (no presence of test samples for evaluation of the model performance). The same type of forecasts are performed by the ARIMAX model, which is similar to ARIMA, with the only difference being the presence of an additional feature termed as 'exogenous input. Since the current dataset does not comprise another feature to be used as the exogenous input of the model, this input has been generated (random uniformly distributed variable).

In the final section of this project (Part III), the fitting and forecasting capabilities of the Seasonal Autoregressive Moving Average model (SARIMA-X) are investigated by applying the same type of forecasts as in Part II. The difference is that SARIMA-X model takes into account the seasonality of the time series and comprises a seasonal component which indicates the length of the seasonal pattern (in this example,equal to 12 months). The evaluation of ARIMA-X and SARIMA-X performance, for cases of known prediction horizon, is based on the comparison of the forecasted values with the expected values (Performance Metric --> Root Mean Squared Error and its distribution (KDE) plot).

The Dataset (.csv file format) for this project has been obtained from Kaggle:

"Electricity Production" -- File: "Electric_Production.csv" -- Source:https://www.kaggle.com/shenba/electricity-production
